

Basic Cruising I Instructor Syllabus

I. Introduction
A. Purpose of the Course
Basic Cruising package prepares students for skippering boats under 30' on San Francisco Bay as well as for the U.S. Sailing Basic Cruising Certification.  It is comprised of Basic Cruising 1, Basic Cruising 2, Navigation 2, Seamanship 2, sufficient reviews to gain the needed skills for certification and practical evaluation of those skills in a testing format.
B. Structure
The Basic Cruising Package runs on two weekends of the student's choice (BC1 and BC2) or in a five day format, Monday through Friday, comprised of BC1 and BC2 in the first four days, followed by a practice and formal evaluation day on Friday.  The weekend courses are almost always followed up by the need for practical review of all skills in a private lesson or Basic Cruising Review format.  Approximately half of the BC Week students certify on Friday, students need an average of one or two.  The average weekend student needs up to three reviews before being prepared to have their skills assessed.  

C. Consider the Following
This is a difficult course for the students; probably the hardest course OCSC offers as it is where students have to break through from being good at sailing maneuvers to being good at sailing the boat and being in command.  So, you should take more of a back seat when they are attempting maneuvers or practicing skills than you might in BK.  That does not mean you stop showering them with encouragement and praise.  You must still be a cheerleader.  However, talking them through maneuvers is something you should only do if they are REALLY struggling with something.
In general, waiting to give them a chance to figure things out for themselves pays dividends at this level.  They need to learn how to respond to surprising and challenging situations without panic.  Keep the boat safe and step in at any point beyond which you think the boat or crew might be at risk.  

D. Important things to discuss with all Basic Cruising I students
Memorize the details of these issues so you can easily present them to your students:

OCSC Objectives:
"To train you to be a safe skipper on San Francisco Bay, to keep your non sailing guests safe and comfortable and to respond adequately when confronted by an emergency or other problem." 
Their Background, Goals, Objectives and Assumptions
It is critical to determine their interests, goals, needs, etc., before fully establishing a plan for BC1.  If you have a student who is from Nebraska and just wants to learn more about cruising his West Wight Potter on a reservoir there, you are going to handle his training differently than that of a student who never sailed before coming to OCSC, is a member, and wants to get certified to charter our Js and Olsons.  You will commonly be faced with students having widely disparate objectives, and your job is to synthesize those into a coherent lesson plan that stays within the guidelines of your syllabus.
Different Instructor for BC2
Sometimes students are surprised that they will have different instructors for the second part of the Basic Cruising Package.  Make sure you discuss this before the course gets underway.  Especially during the weeklong!
Students Needing Review
If students don't fully understand the concept that almost every student in BC needs review before certifying, they will put tremendous amounts of pressure on themselves and you as BC1 and BC2 go on and it becomes clear to them they will not be ready by the end of the formal training.  Be sure before the course gets rolling to advise them that your intention will be to promote their learning as quickly as possible, but that there is much to learn and the average student needs several review sessions to fully learn the material.
BC Students Wanting to Charter OCSC Boats
Occasionally, BC students will want to get certified to charter, but they fail to comprehend the requirement of OCSC membership to charter.  Often that is a breakdown of our student counseling approach.  Please confirm casually with all non-members who express intentions to charter with OCSC that membership is required and, if they have those intentions, they should join today so they save money on the Basic Cruising Package as well.
Your Changing Role as a Coach
Especially if the students have taken BK package with OCSC, it is important to mention that one of the tenets of Basic Cruising is to put the students in situations where they are required to make decisions about safety, traffic, wind strength responses, etc.  Promise to be positive and encouraging, but mention that at the BC level, instructors will allow students to struggle with a scenario or problem a bit more before stepping in to coach, advise or help them.  This is good for the situational response skills they need to develop and is not meant to be a lack of support.

Formal Practical Test
Weekend students may not recognize that, at the BC level, regardless of how they perform in BC, they will still need to take a formal practical evaluation.  So, be sure to mention that, due to the fact that we plan to release them onto the windiest bay in the continental US, they must perform the official OCSC "driver's test" before being able to charter boats.  This is scheduled on Friday for BCW and on a separate day for Weekend students.
Certification Guarantee
If students come into this course level with OCSC Basic Keelboat certification or they take a review at the BK level to challenge the standard, they are guaranteed by OCSC to get their Basic Cruising certification after the Basic Cruising I & II or Basic Cruising Week, or they will receive free reviews or private lessons at half price until they pass.  This guarantee is good for 90 days from the time they take Basic Cruising I, so be sure to encourage them to get through both sessions without delay so they have the most flexibility to take advantage of the guarantee.

E. The BC I student
You can expect a BCI student to be reasonably proficient in the following skills in moderate conditions (< 15 knots):


Rigging
Reefing (at the dock)
Points of Sail
Tacking
Gybing
Docking
Sail Trim (not shaping, just angle of attack)

In addition, the student should have been introduced to (but not mastered) the following skills:
	Marina Procedures--Person Overboard Drill
Be sure you give everyone ample opportunity to practice both of these skills; In fact, where it won't affect the time schedule too much, throw in a couple of surprise overboard recoveries throughout the course.  It will keep the students on their toes.  There is a full set of other skills to be taught, so fit those overboard drills in where you can.
Occasionally, you will have a student that has good basic sailing skills, but is not familiar with our procedures and maneuvers at the Basic Keelboat level.  The first part of this class is review and give you an opportunity to fill in any small holes that might exist whether a student is new to us or not.

II. Topics Covered


Day 1:

AM
Basic Keelboat Skills Review	
Downwind SPOB demo and practice
Stand Up Gybes

PM
Sail De-powering-Lecture
Dockside and OTW 
Reefing Underway

Day 2:

AM
Docking and Departing
Backing Up Under Power
General Practice-(if time allows)

PM
Deadstick Landing/Plans B and C 
Engine Failures/Close Quarters Sailing
	

				
A. Basic Cruising I, Day 2
					
0945
Review class cards, get boat assignment(s), check for no shows (if there are some, notify the office immediately), greet students at the boat, review boat set up, check to see that paperwork has been filed.  

1000 Overview - Review Important Things to Discuss...(above)
* OCSC Objectives 
* Their Background, Goals, Objectives and Assumptions
* Different Instructor for BC2
* Students Needing Review
* BC Students Wanting to Charter OCSC Boats
* Your Changing Role as a Coach
* Formal Practical Test
* Certification Guarantee
* Describe the itinerary for both days (as per the daily schedule, above)




1015
1.  Marina Procedures
Choose a student to be the skipper and depart the dock, following standard OCSC marina procedures.  Keep the boat safe, but try to let the student(s) figure things out.  From this point on, have only two students handle boat/sails as preparation for the P.T.-That includes reefing underway, person overboard recovery.  It doesn't include anchoring.
2.  Basic Sailing Review
Once outside the marina, launch into a quick review of Basic Sailing, to include tacking, gybing, points of sail, fig 8 (Quick Turn) person overboard recovery.    If it seems their BK skills are where you want them, demonstrate for your students an overboard recovery maneuver starting from a broad reach or run.  Talk them through it and how it differs from a regular overboard recovery. 

Emphasize:
* Turning to a beam reach puts them below the victim, not above.
* After the three boat lengths, they will probably already be in the zone of approach-encourage them to head straight back at the victim rather than do a 240 degree tack.
* This maneuver is easier because the boat ends up closer to the perfect approach angle than when doing it from close hauled.

3. Standing up to Gybe
While working your way back downwind to the marina (in a westerly- if you are teaching this section in a Southerly or Easterly, consider doing the gybing before the reefing)
This should be covered with any student who hasn't seen it (some will already be familiar with the technique).  However, EMPHASIZE THE ABSOLUTE NECESSITY OF STANDING AS FAR AFT AS POSSIBLE.  "STAND UP, BACK UP, SHEET, SHEET SHEET." 
Head in for Lunch by 1245, so to arrive at 1300 at the dock.

1300 Lunch
When having lunch with the students, try to make that time educationally beneficial as well, by discussing the morning, asking if there are any questions about the training so far or about sailing in general.

1330:  Helm Balancing Lecture
If there's no wind at 1015am, consider doing this lecture first and Basic Sailing review afterwards
The goal of this lecture is to have each student be able to describe the proper procedures for adjusting weather helm to make the boat more manageable in high winds.  You are given only 30 Minutes for this lecture.  Remember that you have a total of two full hours, from now until 1530 to give your students a clear understanding of and useable skills for de-powering the sail plan to enhance their control of the boat. 
This is an easy place for those of us who love to talk to go overboard.  Remember that most of your students haven't been in school for quite a while.  Some of them don't know (and don't want to know) what a vector is.  The Shaping/De-powering Lecture should be concerned only with aspects of sailing the student can affect.  For example, we could spend ten minutes talking about how the keel generates lift, but (hopefully) the student will never try to adjust the keel to make the boat easier to sail.
IF YOU MAKE NO OTHER MEMORABLE POINT, BE SURE STUDENTS UNDERSTAND THAT TOO MUCH WEATHER HELM MEANS TOO LITTLE CONTROL OF THE BOAT AND IT MUST BE MANAGED.

1. Causes of Weather and Lee Helm
Spend a few minutes pointing out that weather helm is a function of the force of the sails and the water applied to the hull in an unbalanced way, so as to create pressure on the boat to turn toward the wind.  Boats are generally designed to generate some weather helm as a small amount is helpful for control and performance upwind.
2. Determinants of Weather Helm
Angle of heel-The central point of managing weather helm is managing your angle of heel.  The angle of heel affects overall CLR dramatically and also affects the angle (and therefore the effectiveness) of the rudder.  With a big angle of heel, most of the rudder's effect is up and down rather than side to side.  So, it takes more helm to get the rudder to do its job.  
3. Sail complement
The sail complement is partly responsible for the angle of heel, so you could say it is just as important a determinant of weather helm.  It controls the overall power in the sails.  The total amount of sail up is more important than which sails are up, especially on a J24.  However, if you have a full main and no jib, you will have more weather helm than if you have a reefed main and 80% Jib, even though the total sail area is about the same.  That has to do with Center of Effort balanced against Center of Lateral Resistance.  
4. Sail Shape
Deeper sails are more powerful and create more heeling.  Because the main is the biggest and has the most adjustability, changing how full and deep it is will have a large effect on weather helm.  The equation we should emphasize is DRAFT = POWER. 
Start by demonstrating how a sail generates lift.  Use airplane wing, bird wing comparisons, but don't linger on the "Lift" topic too much.  If you are unclear on how to present this concept, read How Sails Work (Chapter 2, Sail Power by Wallace Ross).  Our own presentation of this material should be "low tech."  What the student needs to know is the following:
* Sails work by generating lift that pulls the boat sideways and forward.
* The keel turns some of the sideways force into forward force.
* Because the keel is small, balancing the effort of the sails over the keel keeps the forces balanced.
* When they are unbalanced, weather helm develops 
* Fuller sail/more draft= more power = more weather helm
* Flatter sail/less draft = less power= less weather helm
* Heeling affects weather helm more than sail shape or sail center of effort location
	
5. Sail De-powering tools section
Draw a mainsail with fully powered up draft, briefly explain what Draft is.  Explain that DRAFT =POWER; more draft, more power; less draft, less power and that an excess of weather helm is indicative of too much power; if they are fighting the boat, they need to do something about it.

* The Flatteners: Outhaul and Adjustable Backstay
The Outhaul flattens the lower half of the main sail by pulling the clew aft.
The Adjustable Backstay bends the top 1/3 of the mast aft, the middle of the mast forward, pulling the sail with it, flattening the middle and upper parts of the main.
* The Draft Movers: Cunningham and Halyard
Show how the lengths of fabric are sewn together so that the bias is next to the mast, demonstrate that by pulling on the bias of a napkin, the far corner is pulled towards the bias
The Cunningham (or the Halyard) stretches the luff. This moves the draft forward, counterbalancing the backstay adjuster. When at full hoist on a J24, THE LUFF IS ONLY TENSIONED WITH THE CUNNINGHAM.  When reefed, or on boats without cunninghams, using the halyard to adjust luff tension is necessary.
* The Twisters: Boomvang, Mainsheet and Traveler
Twist must be explained and diagrammed.  Twist is present in any sail under load, but can be dramatically adjusted by changing the downward tension on the leech.  Increasing twist will reduce the power in the top of a sail and help with weather helm.  It must be pointed out that it is possible to have too much twist, with a resulting loss of power, speed, and, therefore, control. 
The Boom vang controls the leech tension, and therefore twist, on all points of sail except for closehauled in moderate breeze when the mainsheet is fully sheeted in. Easing the vang allows the boom to rise and changes the angle of attack of the upper portion of the sail relative to the bottom when the boat is reaching. If the boom is sheeted to centerline(as when closehauled in 10 Knots), easing the vang alone will do nothing to the leech as the mainsheet angle of pull makes the vang mainly redundant.
When close hauled, twisting the sail is somewhat more complicated. First, you only want to create substantial twist while sailing upwind if you have flattened the sail plan, don't have time to reduce sail and are trying to quickly de-power.  Your objective is to keep the middle part of the sail at the proper angle of attack while letting the top of the sail luff to reduce heeling and weather helm.  You need to pull the boom further to windward than normal in order to increase twist without changing the angle of attack.  So, first, bring the traveler to weather.  Then ease the Mainsheet until the boom is positioned back where it was prior to moving the Traveler. Finally, ease the Boomvang.  This allows the boom to rise and twists the top, allowing the leech to fall off to leeward, luffing the top of the sail.  Adjust the vang until you have the proper compromise between de-powering and upwind performance.   This maneuver is known as a "Fisherman's Reef.  The disadvantage of a fisherman's reef is that by definition, part of the sail will be under-trimmed, part will be well trimmed and part will be overtrimmed.  This is less efficient and often tough on the sail as the top of the sail often flogs.  EMPHASIZE ALSO THAT LOSING ALL THE WEATHER HELM IS NOT A GOOD THING, ESPECIALLY ON A FIN KEELED BOAT.  A FISHERMAN'S REEF IS NOT OFTEN USED ON A J24, SO USE IT CAREFULLY AND DON'T OVERDO IT.
Note that there are three jibs:
 the 150% for very light air, up to 10 or 12 knots; 
The 100% is for 10 to 15 knots; 
the 80% is for over 15 knots. 
The major sail shaper for the headsail is the fairlead; it does for the jib what the boom vang and the outhaul do for the main. Demonstrate on the board how by moving the fairlead forward or aft, the tension on the leech or the foot increases or reduces draft and how it induces twist. If we are pulling straight down on the leech, fairlead forward, we have a fully powered up sail with a deep draft; if we pull straight out on the foot, fairlead aft, we have a flat sail with a twisted out top. Then stress the importance of not stalling the top of the jib by moving the fairlead too far forward. The test for proper fairlead position is to move the fairlead one hole at a time, trim the jib for a close haul, then head up slowly until at least one windward telltale starts to lift (break). If the windward telltales lift (break) evenly, the fairlead is positioned correctly. If the upper telltales break first, the fairlead is too far aft. If the lower telltales break first the fairlead is too far forward. POINT OUT THAT THE TRACKS ON THE J24 ARE SIX INCHES TOO LONG.  THEY NEED NEVER PAY ATTENTION TO THE AFT SIX INCHES ON EITHER TRACK.  	

1400:  Sail Shaping/De-Powering
* Practice at the Dock
If the breeze allows and there is room in the slip area, orient the boat in the slip area at an angle to the wind and spring it well.  Then raise the main, and trim as if you were sailing.  As you teach the use of the tools, have them lie under the boom and watch physically what is occurring to the sail and mast as different devices are trimmed and eased.   Don't bother with the jib in the slip; training on fairlead placement can be handled underway.  If it isn't possible to demo the sail shaping at the dock, get under way, but, unless it is very light and flat, be careful about putting students on their backs on the deck while out on the Bay. It's probably better to use changes in heel angle, and weather helm angle to demonstrate the effects of these tools.

* Practice on the Water:
Controlling weather helm and angle of heel with sail shaping controls-This routine should include an opportunity for each student to be at the helm, feel the increases in weather helm with heeling and powering up of sail shape and the decreases as they flatten the boat and the sail plan

1430
After lowering and securing the main, assign another student to marina procedures and get outside the marina, sailing close hauled with just the main up. Have the students watch the draft of the main change using either the draft line or a seam in the sail as you run through a procedure for weather helm reduction:
		1.  Tension outhaul
		2.  Tension backstay and cunningham
		3.  Traveler down
4. Ease Mainsheet

Help them to identify how the draft is reduced by tension on the outhaul first, then the backstay. Show them how the traveler being let down de-powers the main further, though strictly speaking it is not a draft control.
Raise the jib and show the students the effect of jib fairlead placement by placing the lead too far forward, then too far aft, then properly tuned. Do not teach "light winds forward, heavy winds aft." Students armed with this notion invariably place the top of the jib in a stall in lighter winds and in a luff in a heavy wind. Emphasize placement of the fairlead such that the inside telltales break at the same time when the boat is luffed up from close hauled.  The details of fairlead placement are pretty simple, actually- for the 80% jib-forward two holes, 100% jib- even with shrouds to one hole forward or back depending on conditions.  Ignore the aft six inches of the track always.
Have each student take the helm and run through the procedure for de-powering the main, and then for powering it back up. It is convenient to leave the cunningham and outhaul set at this point, but make sure that each student recognizes that they are part of the routine. It is important that each student be able to feel the reduction of weather helm as the controls are applied. Help them to properly evaluate the effect of each change that is made-And, keep them on course.  Students frequently drift off course while tuning the sails. By the end of the practice each student should be able to run through the de-powering procedure w/o guidance. 
Next, take the boat to a beam reach and show the students the effect of the vang for de-powering the main, the other controls being relatively ineffective on off-wind points of sail. Trim it hard to show the increase in heel and weather helm, then, release it completely to show the de-powering effect of twist.

1530: Reefing Underway
This is the last logical part of the de-powering and management of weather helm section.  Students should be familiar with the process of reefing from their time in Basic Keelboat 2.  Now you will refine their reefing skills and show them how it is done safely while underway.

A. Putting in a Reef
* STEP ONE  - SET-UP 

Come to a close reach.  
Insure there is plenty of room ahead and give the helm to your crew.  
REMEMBER:  Because you are no longer driving the boat does not mean that you are no longer responsible.  You are still the skipper and must keep a lookout for traffic and other hazards (such as the pier or the Berkeley Reef), and insure that your crew is maintaining course.  
Bring the main halyard into the cockpit and overhaul it for your crew.  Put two wraps on the halyard winch, uncleat it and hand it to your crew. 
Move forward on the windward side and brace yourself between the mast and the weather shrouds, kneeling is best.
Remove and stow the cunningham.
Uncleat the vang.
Uncoil and uncleat the reef lines.
Release the mainsheet and let the main luff completely. (Turn the main into a flag)
This completes STEP ONE  - SET-UP, the main is now a big, noisy flag. It generates no power.
* STEP TWO  - DO IT!  (TACK, HEAD, CLEW or THC)

Pull the main luff down and out of the mast groove while your crew eases the halyard.
Place the tack reef cringle (make sure it's not the cunningham cringle) on the reef hook right side up. (Demo up side down also and explain how this would damage the sail when the halyard is tightened) 
THAT'S THE "T" OR TACK DONE!
Retighten the halyard.  A slight vertical crease at the luff indicates sufficient tension.  You have to return to the cockpit to winch it and then return to the mast.  ALWAYS, ALWAYS move fore and aft on the windward side!!  
THAT'S THE "H" OR HEAD DONE!
Use the second reef line to lift the boom until it is even with the 1st reef clew cringle and cleat it temporarily. 
Pull the 1st reef line as tight as you can and then a little more.  Having your student pass the line behind their back and hold it and a shroud in one hand while leaning back against the line is a safe technique for getting it as tight as is necessary. 
Cleat it.  Then wrap the reef line around the cleat handle and pull hard.
Tie a slipknot in the 1st reef line within an inch of the cleat.
Release the temporarily cleated 2nd reef line.
THAT'S THE "C" OR CLEW DONE!
This completes STEP TWO  - DO IT.  The main is reefed and could be sheeted in and put to work if needed, but the job's not quite over

* STEP THREE -  CLEAN UP
Set the vang.
Adjust the length of the 2nd reef line
Cleat it.
Coil and larks-head the reef lines separately on the outhaul.
Return to the cockpit.
Have your crew sheet in the mainsail.
Optional:
Install an earring in the reef clew of the sail with the loose leech furled inside it.
OR, if the earring does not provide sufficient visibility, use the sail ties as intermediate reef points to neaten the bunt of the sail.  REMEMBER: These need to be installed loosely, if they are pulled tightly and the reef line slips the sail will rip!
  		
* DONE!

B. Removing (or "shaking out") a reef
* STEP ONE  - SET UP 
Come to a close reach.
Insure there is plenty of room ahead and give the helm to your crew.
Bring the main halyard into the cockpit and overhaul it for your crew.
Remove the intermediate reef points (if installed)
Remove the earing (if installed)
Move forward on the windward side and brace yourself between the mast and the weather shrouds, again kneeling is best.
Uncoil the larksheaded reef lines.
Remove the slipknot from the loaded reef line.
Uncleat the vang.
Have the crew uncleat the mainsheet to get the main to luff completely. (Turn the main into a flag)
This completes STEP ONE  - SET UP, the main is now a big, noisy flag.  It generates no power.

*  STEP TWO  - DO IT (CLEW, HEAD, TACK)
Uncleat the 2nd reef line.
Uncleat the 1st reef line.  THE CLEW IS DONE!
Have your crew hold the main halyard while you uncleat it.
Pull the mainsail down just enough to remove the 1st reef cringle from the reef hook.  
THAT'S THE TACK DONE.
Hoist the main. 
THAT'S THE HEAD DONE.  
Once the sail is up to the black band, and halyard is stowed, set COBRA.  Re-trim mainsheet.


1630:  Return to Dock, secure boat, de-brief students

As you all are securing the boat, take students aside one by one to give them a personal assessment of their progress today and current skill set, as well as reminders of anything they should be thinking of or working on the following day.

1700
Remind your students to come in at 915 am tomorrow for boat rigging.  Have them fill out interim instructor evals (yellow half sheets) and turn them in to the office.  Bid them adieu.   Then put down relevant comments on their class cards.  After they have left, if you are still here, take a look at the interim instructor evals to get a heads up on problems or criticisms. IF THERE ARE ANY-NOTIFY A MANAGER TO DISCUSS HOW TO RESPOND!!!  

Basic Cruising I, Day 2

 0945
Review evaluations from previous day. If any student has expressed dissatisfaction, now is the time to figure out what to do about it. Discuss with the Club Manager how to fix the problem.

1000:  Docking and Departing	
Have everyone leave the slip and return to the dock at least twice.  This can be done on a rotating basis (students who are doing well at the maneuvers) or several iterations at a time for any person who is struggling with control.  You must have the students dock both Port and Starboard side to.  That adds up to a minimum of four docking/departures per student.   Keep a pace on the exercise so you have time for Backing Up before lunch.

1145: Backing up Under Power

A. Emphasize...
...the importance of being able to operate the boat in reverse to back out of tight slip areas.     The best place for this is between Y and Z dock.  However, you MUST be cognizant of traffic from our boats and BMC customers.  Stay in the main channel if anyone is departing. Drift to Z dock if you are in there when someone enters the slip way and you are concerned about sufficient room.

B.  For operating the boat in reverse:
* Have students bring the boat to a stop from forward first
* Back up at least two to three boat lengths each time
* EMPHASIZE: they must hold onto the tiller or it will be slammed to one side.
* Steer with both the engine and the tiller
* Have students note how much easier it is to get control while transitioning from reverse to forward.
* Each student usually needs only to do this twice to have it down.

If this maneuver goes quickly, you may find yourself done with motoring by 1200.  Please go through marina procedures and go sailing, working on overboard drills after sailing sufficiently far upwind.  At 1245, start back in, gybing as much as possible along the way.


1300:  LUNCH

1330:  Emergency Sailing
* Dead Stick Landings - "Plan B"
* Demo of hoisting sails underway without an engine - "Plan C"
* Sailing to the fuel dock 
* Sailing in the marina (short tacking)
* Getting out of irons

This training is done completely on the boat, no lecture time needed.  Below is a narrative of how Ray Wichmann teaches and organizes this training.  It is set up to be efficient use of time, but more importantly, properly sequential for the student learning process for close quarters sailing, emergency sailing, etc.


1. 	ENGINE FAILURE WITHIN THE MARINA or
	THE DEADSTICK LANDING ("PLAN B")

The dead-stick landing may be the most important item in the entire BC syllabus. The information and experience your students gain in this exercise will go a long way toward confidence building and eliminating damage to their or others' boats.
Start with this question:  (Perhaps just as you are finishing lunch)
"If, after entering the marina and sea-furling your sails, you lose your engine; what would you do?"
Most students are unable to delineate the real issues involved with this problem.  It is too easy to get preoccupied with the engine to the exclusion of all else.  The big issue is not that the engine has died, but that we have to reestablish control of the boat.  Warn them that burying their head in the locker with the fuel tank or staring at the engine and not looking where you are going is unsafe.  While the boat still has way on, assess the situation for traffic and hazards.  Use the last of the boat speed to move the boat toward a safer location.  
Then ask them: 
"How will the boat orient itself to the wind with no engine and no sail up?" 
Most students don't know the answer to this question or they guess.  While the Socratic Method of questioning is a great one for getting students to think hard about things, keep in mind that asking questions that you know students won't know the answer to is often bad for the Trust model.  No student likes to be set up to be wrong or look foolish.  If you ask those questions, be sure everyone knows they are rhetorical questions and re-assure them that dealing with the control of a boat without sails or engine is subtle and counter-intuitive.

So then say, "Let's go find out!" 

Have one of your students (choose one that needs more motoring practice) take the boat out of the slip.  Have the student position the boat head-to-wind in the middle of the fairway approximately abeam the leeward end of the fuel dock (assuming a west wind).  Shift into neutral to simulate an engine failure.  Ask the driver to steer directly into the eye of the wind as long as there is steerage.  When the boat loses all way and can no longer be steered, allow it to settle onto a broad reach.  You will sail bare-poles down the fairway with the engine idling. 

Explain to your students:
"This is normal, inevitable, and unavoidable.  The boat is going to a broad reach and there is nothing you can do about it.  Do not be alarmed!!  This is what will happen every time, because there is more windage forward of the pivot point (the center of lateral resistance or CLR) than aft.  Bows and cabins are higher than sterns and cockpits.  Once the boat rotates downwind to a broad reach, it will begin to move downwind.  This is your key to success, because once the boat begins to move you can steer it!  You can't steer it upwind because it will just lose all way and blow down to a broad reach again, but you can steer it downwind.  So....   Look downwind (that's where you're going!) and pick a place to go.  Look for an empty endtie or slip that is reachable and steer the boat toward it."

Remind your students that in an emergency it is better to go into someone else's slip than to hit other boats or go onto the rocks.  Any port in a storm.  Generally, students are surprised at how easy it is to steer the boat on a broad reach.  Switch the helm so that each student gets to see just how easy it is to control the boat going downwind under bare poles.   This is PLAN B.  Plan A was to not have the motor die in the first place.  
(Obviously, if your students, or you, have not found a suitable landing place, at some point you will have to re-engage the motor to keep from running into something, but generally, you will find a reasonable place to land keeping the emergency as realistic as possible.)
You are now perfectly set up to demonstrate a downwind docking.  Explain that the upwind line is the most important when docking, and since you will be docking stern upwind instead of the more usual bow upwind, a stern-line will be needed.  Have your students rig a stern-line and move the fenders if necessary while still steering toward the empty slip to leeward (PLAN B).  Make sure that the student handling the stern-line understands the importance of wrapping the line around the windward end of the windward cleat and using the stern-line as a break to stop the boat.  Now dock the boat downwind, secure it with bow and stern lines, shut off the motor, and answer any questions.  
One of the most common questions they have is why they didn't just raise sail.  Explain that raising sail is PLAN C and you are going to do that, but it would certainly be more complicated than PLAN B.  With novices or untrained crew it will be easier and safer not to bother and just cleanly and safely execute PLAN B.  

* HINTS:
Typically this simulation (and the drills following) are done in BC1, Day2, just after lunch.  Traffic is at a minimum with the morning departure rush (1030-1130) over and the afternoon return (1530-1700) not yet started.  Still you must keep your eyes open for traffic that will not understand why you are drifting about in the fairway.  Occasionally you will have to abort a drill by engaging the engine to avoid close encounters of the boat kind.  As soon as all is clear, restart the drill.  
When looking for a place to drift into, there is almost always room at the hotel dock, but there is no padding on the edge of the dock and no cleats.  F dock usually has an empty slip in the row just south of the big white schooner and sometimes there is an open endtie just east of the big catamaran endtied on the south side of the fairway.  
Finally, warn your students about going to far to leeward within the marina.  A lee shore is a lee shore no matter where you are!  Some students (and charters also, unfortunately), in an effort to give themselves as much time as possible to raise and COBRA the main, go too far downwind in the fairway.  If the engine were to die, their options would be very limited.  Even emergency anchoring would be difficult right up against a lee shore.  Recommend that they don't go past the western end of F dock.  
If the wind is not from the west, but from the north or south, you can use the turning basin for this drill.  Use the hotel dock to land if the wind is from the south and the dock next to the California Fish and Game boats if it is from the north.

2. 	RAISING THE SAILS WITHOUT AN ENGINE ("PLAN C")


Raising sail when the engine is not available to hold the bow into the wind will be something new for your students.  After completing the dead-stick landing, leave the temporary landing place that you selected and motor back out into open water, either in the fairway or outside the marina.  Ask them which sail they want to raise first.  The usual answer is the main, because they are used to it always going up first and down last.  Remind them that raising the main is a relatively complicated, two-person job and since the boat will be on a broad reach, it would be hard on the main to drag it up across the shrouds and swept-back spreaders.  Contrast this with the simple one-person job of raising the jib on any point of sail.  
Shift the engine to neutral again (or shut it off if outside the marina) and allow the boat to assume a broad reach just as in the dead-stick landing.  Have one student on the helm and another raise the jib.  Once the halyard tension is set, steer up to a beam reach and trim the jib properly.  Ask the jib trimmer to keep the jib trimmed properly regardless of the point of sail.  Have the driver steer the boat up to a close reach.  Try to tack the boat.  Usually you can, but sometimes you can't.


Explain that with only the jib set there are two issues you must deal with:
* Significant lee helm because all of the sail area is forward of the CLR.
* Lack of boat speed.
Both of these issues make it more difficult to steer, more difficult to point (hence the close reach not the close hauled course), and more difficult (sometimes impossible) to tack.  
Ask your students:
"What would you do if you must tack (because the pier is in front of you, for example) and can't?"  
Answer:
Gybe!  Because the jib only sail complement makes gybing very easy.

Rotate your students so that each gets a chance to attempt several tacks, a gybe, and to keep the jib trimmed properly.  When the boat is tacked almost all boat speed is lost and the bow will fall off to a beam reach (or below) coming out of the tack.  Make sure the jib trimmer sheets out as necessary, keeping the jib trimmed properly, so we can get our boat speed back quickly.  
With sailing under jib alone completed, it is time to raise the main. Put the boat on a close reach, making sure that there is plenty of room in front of you.  Explain that the procedure for raising the main will be the same as always, except that we are sailing on a close reach instead of motoring head to wind.  This means more motion and a greater need to hold on.  
Send a crewmember to the mast, raise and COBRA (or reef) the main. 
Point out to your students that they have now gone from a boat with no sails or engine to a fully functioning sailboat, while maintaining control throughout the transformation. Congratulate them and then remind them that this was not just a fun exercise, but something they will have to do at some point in their sailing careers.  
* HINTS:
A good time for this drill is just after the dead-stick landing (PLAN B), since your students have likely asked about raising sail during that maneuver.  At that time you explained to them the value of the simplicity of PLAN B, but that with experienced crew raising sail (PLAN C) could be a proper response to an engine failure, even in the marina.   
Implementing Plan C will require your best judgment.  During the week-day classes it may be quite safe to raise sails within the marina, but on a busy summer weekend day it would be, to say the least, inappropriate, if not rude and dangerous.  Also effecting your decision is which jib is rigged.  With the 80% jib alone it is much more difficult to point, and this is certainly a consideration within the marina.  The 100% jib gives you get better pointing, more boat speed, and less visibility: a mixed bag at best inside the marina.  Be aware of the conditions, consider your options, and be prudent!
If you choose to do this drill outside the marina (quite common), use crew weight placement to help stop the cavitation of the engine while motoring to windward.  It helps not to motor directly into the wind and chop, but to angle off 10-15 degrees to avoid pounding each time you crest a wave.  Get well to windward (near the end of the restored section of the pier) before shutting down the engine and beginning the drill.  
Whether inside or outside the marina, the jib will go up quickly; but if you try to raise the main inside, you may find that you will have to tack before it is completely up.  With our typical wind from the Gate, you can minimize this problem by starting in the southeast corner of the turning basin.  This will give you the longest run before having to tack.  Even so, you may run out of room.  Make the decision to tack early, so you can clear the crew off the foredeck!
If raising the main outside the marina with the wind in the Gate, a close reach on a port tack starting near the pier works well.  Make sure your course keeps you well clear the Berkeley Reef, it has a nasty habit of sneaking up under your lee.  
If the wind is from the north or south, the best plan would be to rearrange the syllabus and do this drill another time.  You could raise sail while beam reaching in the fairway, but the drill loses some of its drama. If you go outside, with a north wind the pier is an all too close lee shore.  With a south wind there is plenty of room but still no drama.

3.  SAILING TO THE FUEL DOCK

If a charterer is unable to start the engine upon their return to the marina, OCSC policy is for them to sail to the outside or south side of the fuel dock and not to sail into their slip.  To help your students with this, we have another drill.  
Explain to your students that they should not sail down the fairway until the engine has been started.  This way, they avoid the need to short tack back up to the fuel dock if for many reason they can't start the engine.  If the engine doesn't start, tack from beam reach to beam reach behind the breakwater while preparing the boat to dock on the outside of the fuel dock.  Rig fenders and dock-lines (fore and aft), starboard side.  Explain to your students that the approach and landing at the fuel dock are very similar to the final approach of a MOB, i.e. close reaching while controlling your speed by filling or luffing the main. However, you can afford more speed than with an overboard recovery so have them keep their speed up.
Demonstrate this for your students by tacking at the south end of the breakwater on to port tack, bearing away down into the fairway to a position from which you can sail up to the fuel dock on a close reach, and land gently on the outside. Have a student step off with the bowline and secure it.  Then hand them the stern line and have them secure it also.  Then sheet in the boom enough to quiet it down.  This procedure minimizes the chance of your crew being hit by the boom as they step off the boat and move about the dock securing lines.  Answer any of your students' questions, then cast off and give each of them a turn.  

* HINTS:
This drill is based on the normal wind in the Gate.  If the wind is from the south you can use the dock next to the California Fish and Game boats.  

If the wind is from the north use the fuel dock, but make sure your students understand the need to sail right up to it and really get there.  With the dock to windward it would be very easy to not get close enough for the crew to step safely onto the dock, and then for the boat to be blown away when it stops.  It is also important for the crew to get the bowline made fast to the dock quickly and not try to hold the boat beam to the wind up against the dock.  Once the bow is made fast get the main down and the boom secured.  Then pass the stern line to the dock and pull the stern up.  There is no need to pull the main down each time when practicing this drill.  Once the bowline is secure and any questions answered, just cast off by having the crew un-cleat the bowline, work their way to the shrouds by passing the lifeline through their hands, them push off and get aboard.  
 


4.  SHORT TACKING IN THE MARINA

There is one final drill for your students to experience, sailing in close quarters. Explain that some sailors find sailing and tacking close to objects somewhat disconcerting and you would like to give them some experience before they have to do it on their own.
Cast off from the fuel dock and have the crew raise the jib while sailing down the fairway and into the turning basin.  Demonstrate how to short tack up the fairway.  When you get to the breakwater, bear away back down the fairway and give the helm to one of your students.  Once back in the turning basin, have them head back upwind and coach them through the first tack or two. Then let them sail the rest of the way up to the breakwater on their own.  Bear away, switch the crew around, and repeat until each student has had an opportunity. 
* HINTS:
First you must decide if you are just going to demonstrate this drill or if you will give each of your students the opportunity to do it also.  If you do this drill in the early to mid - afternoon, the chances are good that the traffic will be light enough for all students to have a go.  On those occasions when you cant fit in all your students, try to complete it the next day.  
Always stay close to the helm so you can take over steering if necessary.  Keep a sharp lookout for traffic, especially when using the 100% jib.  
Students often try to pinch-up in the fairway in an effort to stay away from the edges.  Remind them that if they lose too much boat speed they will not be able to tack and the wind will blow them into the very thing they are trying to avoid..  The secret to success while sailing upwind is sail as rapidly as possible directly at the obstacle you are attempting to avoid and then use your boat speed to tack away.  Tacks need to be done crisply, carrying your boat speed through the tack, because there is limited room to accelerate before you need to tack again.  
Encourage your students to use the entire width of the fairway and not fear the edges.  They will have to make fewer tacks that way.  
This description is based on a wind from the Gate; which is of course, the most normal direction for Berkeley. If the wind is from the north or south; you could use the turning basin, but you have room for only a few tacks. It is better to rearrange the syllabus and do this drill another time.

1615:   Head back to Marina
1630:   At Dock
While securing the boat, take each student aside to give a debriefing of skills and weaknesses.  Cover the following areas:
* Are their Basic Keelboat skills reasonable?
* How did they handle the more difficult engine maneuvers?
What improvement will they need to gain at person overboard recovery before the evaluation at the end of Basic Cruising II?
* How much of the sail trim info were they able to absorb and use?
* Did you do enough short tacking in marina, or should next instructor do some?

There should be only two reasons to recommend reviews at this level: 
* Their Basic Keelboat skills are too weak to get reasonable value from Basic Cruising II 
* They are going to have a long layoff before they can return for BC II.  Only if number 1 applies AND they took Basic Keelboat 1 & 2 from us would they be free, however.  So, generally, even if they are having some weaknesses, it's better to wait to see how they do at BC II before recommending reviews.	
	
After the boat is put away, critique their de-rigging procedure and describe the next step for them, which is Basic Cruising II.  Encourage them to study for and sign up soon for the next weekend.  Take them up to the clubroom to complete their course wrap up.  Step in to see the club manager for the day to review with him/her how the two days went, whether everyone seems to be happy and progressing well.  Then go upstairs and wait with the students for the club manager.  Then, thank everyone, wish them well and take your leave.

1700
Fill out the class cards and identify for the next course's instructor where you believe the most review time should be spent so they can give the student the best chance of certifying.

1715 End of Course

BC I Manual -  page 1
rev 6.23.02 
Jepsen, Wichmann, Macleod, Shull, Rawlings

